# 1.0 Building a simple Module

**Index**
- Basic content of a module
- Creating a List
- Building a MySQL/database Table
- Using forms and a database
- Listing contents of a database table

This tutorial will teach you how to build a simple XOOPS module from scratch.
The first step required is to download the blank module called Tutorial, [https://github.com/kevinpetit/kaotik-module-tutorial/raw/master/tutorial.zip](which you can download from GitHub here).

This tutorial assumes that you have a basic understanding of HTML, SQL and PHP.
 
#### Basic content of a module
When you open up the Tutorial module, you will see that it exists out of these files and directories:
* images
    * tutorial.png
* language
    * english
        * main.php
        * modinfo.php
* sql
    * mysql.sql
* index.php
* xoops_version.php

These files are all we need to get started - so let's get to it. Open up the **xoops_version.php** in your preferred code editor (like [https://notepad-plus-plus.org/](NotePad++), [http://sublimetext.com](Sublime Text), [https://code.visualstudio.com/](Visual Studio Code), [http://atom.io](Atom), [http://backets.io](Brackets), [https://www.jetbrains.com/phpstorm](PhpStorm),...).
In this tutorial, I will use PhpStorm, but you can use any editor you want.

When you open up the **xoops_version.php** file, you'll see this: 
```php
<?php
// Tutorial module
// Created by kaotik
$modversion['name'] = "Tutorial";
$modversion['version'] = 1.00;
$modversion['description'] = "This is a tutorial module to teach how to build a simple module";
$modversion['author'] = "KaotiK";
$modversion['credits'] = "KaotiK";
$modversion['help'] = "";
$modversion['license'] = "GPL see LICENSE";
$modversion['official'] = 0;
$modversion['image'] = "images/tutorial.png";
$modversion['dirname'] = "tutorial";
// Admin
$modversion['hasAdmin'] = 0;
// Menu
$modversion['hasMain'] = 1;
?>
```

Now let's go through what this all means.

```php
<?php
// Tutorial module
// Created by kaotik
```
If you have ever worked with PHP, this should be very easy to understand - if not, let me explain it to you.
The first line, which contains **<?php**, which is the PHP code tag, starts our PHP code. As long as we don't close our tag, we're in PHP mode. In the last line, we use the closing tag for this, which is **?>**.

It's a good practice to not place spaces in front of the **<?php* tag, as this can cause issues on some configurations.

The next two lines are comments, which means that it is text which won't be processed by PHP. This is handy to write down some information.
In this case, we've listed the name of the module as well as the author. Keep in mind that these comments are *optional* and your module will still work if you remove them.
```php
$modversion['name'] = "Tutorial";
$modversion['version'] = 1.00;
$modversion['description'] = "This is a tutorial module to teach how to build a simple module";
```
These lines are our module "configuration values". To keep it simple, we're going to store information in a keyword.
Think of it like having a list (called $modversion), in which we have a key (name) which stores a value (Tutorial).

What matters here is that these keys contain the configuration information about the module.
In the example above, both the **name**, **version** and **description** are set.

```php
$modversion['author'] = "KaotiK";
$modversion['credits'] = "KaotiK";
$modversion['help'] = "";
```

Here we set both the **author**, **credits** and **help** values. Help isn't required, and in our example we aren't using it.
If you decide to use it, you can point to a file or a link with more information.

```php
$modversion['license'] = "GPL";
$modversion['official'] = 0;
$modversion['image'] = "images/tutorial.png";
$modversion['dirname'] = "tutorial";
```

And this is where it starts to get interesting. Here we set the **license** that our module uses - however, this should **always** be GPL, as the XOOPS Core is licensed under the GPL license, which requires any derivative works to be licensed under the GPL as well (if you don't understand this - don't worry - the only thing you need to know is that the answer here is always GPL).

The official value is used to mark modules as being official modules that are supported by the XOOPS team. Normally, you'll keep this on 0.

Image is the image that will be used for your module in the XOOPS admin. In our case, that's the **images/tutorial.png** file. 
You can find a blank version of that image on the [http://www.xoops.org](XOOPS website).

Last, we have dirname, which is the name of the directory in which we store our module. Since our module is called tutorial, it's only logic that we call this "tutorial".
Try to give your modules logical names, as these are shown in the URL of your site - something called **pinkfluffyunicornsarebackforrevenge** might not be the best choice for a news module.


```php
// Admin
$modversion['hasAdmin'] = 0;
// Menu
$modversion['hasMain'] = 1;
?>
```
And this is the most interesting part of the file - **hasAdmin** and **hasMain**.
These values control wether or not there is an administration part for your module, or if the module has an entry in the main menu.
If you set both of these to 0, it will still show up in the XOOPS Administration, so you can still uninstall it.
hasAdmin=0 means there is no administration part to this module. Since I want the module to appear on the main menu I've set hasMain to 1. If I had set it to 0 then it wouldn't show up on main menu. If you set hasAdmin and hasMain both to 0, it will still show up on module administration allowing 

As explained before, the *?>* stops the PHP code and returns us to normal HTML (which we don't need in this case).

**Using index.php**

Now that we understand the **xoops_version.php** file, lets install our module and check if it works...
So, let's upload our module, go to the XOOPS administration panel and let's go the modules and install our module.
When it's installed, let's check it out on our website - click on Tutorial in your main menu, and... you'll see an empty page!

We're going to check now why the page is blank.

```php 
<?php
// Tutorial 
// Created by KaotiK 
require('../../mainfile.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/footer.php');
?>
```
You'll notice 3 lines you haven't seen before - all the other lines should be familiar to you.

So, what do these lines do? These load the XOOPS environment for us, so we can use all the handy features that XOOPS has to offer us.
The main responsible for this is **require('../../mainfile.php');** - this is the main XOOPS file which contains all of the configuration values and gives us access to the information about our users!

The **require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');** is responsible for loading up the XOOPS header, which makes your module look like it's part of XOOPS.

The **require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/footer.php');** loads up extra scripts and 'finishes' the page.

So, let's try to make our module a bit less like a blank canvas and add something!

Add, between the **require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');** and **require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/footer.php');** lines the following code: **echo "Hello world!";**, so that it looks like this:

```php
<?php
// Tutorial 
// Created by KaotiK 
require('../../mainfile.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
echo "Hello world!";
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/footer.php');
?>
```

When you now go to your website and reload the Tutorial module, the words "Hello world!" will appear on your site - congratulations, your first module is a fact!
But we're not happy yet with this... let's continue and create a user list!

**Creating a list**
Lets take this a step further! We're going to create a simple list of our users. 

Lets replace **echo "Hello world!";** with this code:
(Don't worry if this looks intimidating - we're going over each and every line below!).

```php
$member_handler =& xoops_gethandler('member');
$foundusers =& $member_handler->getUsers();
foreach (array_keys($foundusers) as $j) {
    echo $foundusers[$j]->getVar("uname").'<br>';
}
```


Click on tutorial on your main menu and you will now see a list of your current users. Now let's review what each line does. The first line calls a xoops handler which deals with member and assigns it to $member_handler. The second line grabs all users and places them in $foundusers as an array. Now we can loop through all the results using foreach. What foreach is doing is basicly saying "I'm going to take the whole stack and 'do something' to each 'line' ". If you wanted to see everything inside the array try this:
Warning: Only try the following code if you are using a test site with a small list of users.

```php
$member_handler =& xoops_gethandler('member');
$foundusers =& $member_handler->getUsers();
foreach (array_keys($foundusers) as $j) {
//echo $foundusers[$j]->getVar("uname").'<br>';
print_r($foundusers[$j]);
echo '<br><br><br>';
} 
```
You will get a big list that will look confusing but shows all variables concerning each of your users.

Moving on. Lets properly format the list and get some more info on each of your users.
First let's create a header bar for our table. As I said before, this is a simple tutorial, so I will show you the easy way, which isn't necessarily the correct way of doing it. I will however use more elaborate and professional methods in upcoming tutorials. 
To avoid confusion I'm going to show the whole index.php file:

```php
<?php
// Tutorial 
// Created by KaotiK
require('../../mainfile.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
?>
<table width="100" border="0">
<tr>
<td bgcolor="#99CC99">Name</td>
<td bgcolor="#66CC99">Email</td>
</tr>
</table>
<?php
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/footer.php');
?>
```

Now click on tutorial from your main menu. You will now see a table heading saying Name and Email. Great! Lets place some info into it.

```php
<?php
// Tutorial
// Created by KaotiK
require('../../mainfile.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
?>
<table width="100" border="0">
<tr>
<td bgcolor="#99CC99">Name</td>
<td bgcolor="#66CC99">Email</td>
</tr>
<?php
$member_handler =& xoops_gethandler('member');
$foundusers =& $member_handler->getUsers();
foreach (array_keys($foundusers) as $j) {
echo '<tr><td>'.$foundusers[$j]->getVar("uname").'</td><td>'.$foundusers[$j]->getVar("email").'</td></tr>';
}
?>
</table>
<?php
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/footer.php');
?>
```
Click on tutorial from main link and you will now see our table populated with user's name and email. Nice! However the code is very sloppy, going back and forth between php and html. Now let's do the whole thing in php:

```php
<?php
// Tutorial
// Created by KaotiK
require('../../mainfile.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
echo '<table width="100" border="0">
<tr>
<td bgcolor="#99CC99">Name</td>
<td bgcolor="#66CC99">Email</td>
</tr>';
$member_handler =& xoops_gethandler('member');
$foundusers =& $member_handler->getUsers();
foreach (array_keys($foundusers) as $j) {
echo '<tr><td>'.$foundusers[$j]->getVar("uname").'</td><td>'.$foundusers[$j]->getVar("email").'</td></tr>';
}
echo '</table>';
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/footer.php');
?>
```


Ahhh. Much better. Same end result but now the code is more legible. Let's bring some more xoops standards into it. First thing to do is replace the text "name" and "email" with some language constants. Lets create a folder called language (important: folder name should be all in lower case). Now, inside that folder lets create another folder called english. Inside the folder english create a file called main.php. Now place this code inside main.php:
```php
<?php
define('TT_NAME','Name');
define('TT_EMAIL','Email');
?>
```

Create another file in this same folder called modinfo.php Inside this file place:
```php
<?php
?>
```

What we are doing here is creating 2 language constants to replace our current text. Language constants allow users of your module to easily replace module text with their own native language. Now open index.php and change the following:

```php
<?php
// Tutorial
// Created by KaotiK
require('../../mainfile.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
echo '<table width="100" border="0">
<tr>
<td bgcolor="#99CC99">'.TT_NAME.'</td>
<td bgcolor="#66CC99">'.TT_EMAIL.'</td>
</tr>';
$member_handler =& xoops_gethandler('member');
$foundusers =& $member_handler->getUsers();
foreach (array_keys($foundusers) as $j) {
echo '<tr><td>'.$foundusers[$j]->getVar("uname").'</td><td>'.$foundusers[$j]->getVar("email").'</td></tr>';
}
echo '</table>';
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/footer.php');
?>
```

Excelent! We now have language constants in our module.
Building a MySql Table
Almost all modules use forms and a DB in some way, so now I'm going to show how to create a simple form that has it's data inserted into the database (which I will refer to now as DB).

First open xoops_version.php and add the following:
```php 
<?php
// Tutorial Module 
// Created by kaotik
$modversion['name'] = "Tutorial";
$modversion['version'] = 1.00;
$modversion['description'] = "This is a tutorial module to teach how to build a simple module";
$modversion['author'] = "KaotiK";
$modversion['credits'] = "KaotiK";
$modversion['help'] = "";
$modversion['license'] = "GPL see LICENSE";
$modversion['official'] = 0;
$modversion['image'] = "images/tutorial.png";
$modversion['dirname'] = "tutorial";
// Admin
$modversion['hasAdmin'] = 0;
// Menu
$modversion['hasMain'] = 1;
$modversion['sqlfile']['mysql'] = "sql/mysql.sql";
$modversion['tables'][0] = "tutorial_myform";
?>
```

The first line of the new code tells xoops where the sql file is located. The second tells it the table name.
It's good practice to start table count with 0. You should also preappend your module name to the tables, so that latter on, when using phpmyadmin you can easily locate and identify witch tables belong to witch module. This line tells xoops that this module willl create 1 table. This is however only part of the process, we still need to tell xoops what's inside the table, namely what fields and their properties. To do this lets create another folder called sql. Inside folder sql create a file called mysql.sql Open this file and place this code:

```php
CREATE TABLE tutorial_myform (
tt_id int(5) unsigned NOT NULL auto_increment,
name varchar(30) NOT NULL default '',
address varchar(30) NOT NULL default '',
telephone varchar(30) NOT NULL default '',
email varchar(30) NOT NULL default '',
PRIMARY KEY (tt_id),
KEY name (name)
) TYPE=MyISAM;
```

The first line tells xoops to create a table called tutorial_myform. The first field called tt_id is a number field that allows a maximum of 5 digits ( int(5) ), unsigned means it doesn't acept negative values, NOT NULL means it can't be empty and auto_increment will add a number to each row, meaning if the previous row had tt_id=5 then the new row will have tt_id=6. Notice: This field is called tt_id and not id because id is a protected name of mysql, meaning you can't use it for your own purposes. The following 4 fields are similar. 

They define a field name (name, address, telephone and email), data type ( varchar(30) ) which in this case is a 30 character variable. To read more about this type and more check mysql.com. The next line defines a PRIMARY KEY. All tables should have a primary key defined. Normally I always set my primary keys to each tables id, in this case tt_id. When you have a lot of rows in a table, to increase speed you should index additional fields. Normally I index the ones which are used more often as reference, in this case "name" that's why I have: "KEY name (name)". Notice: the line before )TYPE=MyISAM; should NOT have a comma (,) . You should be carefull not to index too many fields as each new index increases the table size. Finally we define what type of table it is, I personally always use MyISAM but you can experiment with others. You can read more about this here and here.
Ok. We are ready for the next stage. In order for Xoops to create this table we need to do a full uninstall of the module. Then reinstall it. So let's do it.

- 1- Go into module administration and remove the check from active on the tutorial module. Click Submit. Confirm by clicking submit again. 
- 2- Click back to module administration
- 3- Click on module uninstall icon which now shows in front of the tutorial module. Confirm by clicking yes. You will now notice a red error message saying that it was unable to drop table xxx_tutorial_myform. This is correct since we told xoops there was a table in xoops_version.
- 4 - Click back to module administration.
- 5 - Now install the module Tutorial.

We now have a xoops module with a table at our disposal! Let's continue.
Using Forms and a Database
Lets build a simple form in index.php

```php
<?php
// Tutorial
// Created by KaotiK
require('../../mainfile.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
?>
<form name="tutorial_form" method="post" action="index.php">
<table width="400" border="0">
<tr>
<td align="right">Name</td>
<td><input type="text" name="name"></td>
</tr><tr>
<td align="right">Address</td>
<td><input type="text" name="address"></td>
</tr><tr>
<td align="right">Telephone</td>
<td><input type="text" name="tel"></td>
</tr><tr>
<td align="right">Email</td>
<td><input type="text" name="email"></td>
</tr><tr>
<td>&nbsp;</td>
<td><input type="submit" name="submit" value="submit"></td>
</tr>
</table>
</form>
<?php
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/footer.php');
?>
```

Now if you click on tutorial on main menu you will see a form with name, address, telephone and email and a submit button. Clicking on the submit button brings you back to index.php but doesn't do anything. 

Insert the following code:
```php
<?php
// Tutorial 
// Created by KaotiK 
require('../../mainfile.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
if (isset($_POST['submit'])){
echo 'my name is: '. $_POST['name'];
}
?>
```

I've only placed the top part of the code to keep this page smaller. Your index.php file should have the entire code.
Now when you click on submit you get a line of text saying "my name is: " and your name. Let me explain what is happening. The php command if is a conditional control. IF something is TRUE (for ex.) then DO something. In this case IF the form button was pressed then print the statment. The submit button is ```$_POST['submit']``` the name 'submit' comes from the name of our button and to check if it exists I used ```isset``` which returns TRUE if it does exist and FALSE if it does not.
Now try pressing submit without filling anything. You will notice that it still prints "my name is: " but without a name. Let's create an error message if no name is filled in.

```php
<?php
// Tutorial 
// Created by KaotiK 
require('../../mainfile.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
if (isset($_POST['submit'])){
if (empty($_POST['name'])){
echo 'please fill in a name';
} else {
echo 'my name is: '. $_POST['name'];
}
}
?>
```

Pressing submit with an empty name now prints an error message. You will notice that I'm using an IF condition inside another IF. It's saying: if the form field named "name" is empty then print 'please fill in a name' if not (else) ```'my name is: '. $_POST['name']```

**Putting Data into the DB**

Let's take this a step further. We will now insert the form data into our DB table.

```php 
<?php
// Tutorial 
// Created by KaotiK 
require('../../mainfile.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
if (isset($_POST['submit'])){
if (empty($_POST['name'])){
echo 'please fill in a name';
} else {
$name=$_POST['name'];
$address=$_POST['address'];
$tel=$_POST['tel'];
$email=$_POST['email'];
$query = "Insert into ".$xoopsDB->prefix("tutorial_myform")." (name, address, telephone, email) values ('$name', '$address', '$tel', '$email' )";
$res=$xoopsDB->query($query);
if(!$res) {
echo "error: $query";
} else {
echo "Data was correctly inserted into DB!";
}
}
}
?>
```

The first 4 lines of new code create variables set to form values. I've done it this way for a better understanding of what's happening. The next line $query builds the line that will be used by $xoopsDB in

```php
$res=$xoopsDB->query($query);
```

The next line:

```php
if(!$res)
```

checks if any error occurred when accessing the DB. If all went fine print "Data was correctly inserted into DB!". In later tutorials I will teach you about text sanitation and it's importance.
Listing table contents

Now we are going to create a button to list all the content in our table.

```php
<?php
// Tutorial 
// Created by KaotiK 
require('../../mainfile.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
if (isset($_POST['listall'])){
echo '<table width="100" border="0">
<tr>
<td bgcolor="#99cc99">Name</td>
<td bgcolor="#66cc99">Address</td>
<td bgcolor="#99cc99">Telephone</td>
<td bgcolor="#66cc99">Email</td>
</tr>';
$query = $xoopsDB->query(' SELECT * FROM ' . $xoopsDB->prefix('tutorial_myform'));
while($myrow = $xoopsDB->fetchArray($query) )
{
$name = $myrow['name'];
$address = $myrow['address'];
$telephone = $myrow['telephone'];
$email = $myrow['email'];
echo '<tr><td bgcolor="#99cc99">'.$name.'</td><td bgcolor="#66cc99">'.$address.'</td><td bgcolor="#99cc99">'.$telephone.'</td><td bgcolor="#66cc99">'.$email.'</td></tr>';
}
echo '</table>';
}
if (isset($_POST['submit'])){
if (empty($_POST['name'])){
echo 'please fill in a name';
} else {
$name=$_POST['name'];
$address=$_POST['address'];
$tel=$_POST['tel'];
$email=$_POST['email'];
$query = "Insert into ".$xoopsDB->prefix("tutorial_myform")." (name, address, telephone, email) values ('$name', '$address', '$tel', '$email' )";
$res=$xoopsDB->query($query);
if(!$res) {
echo "error: $query";
} else {
echo "Data was correctly inserted into DB!";
}
}
}
?>
<form name="tutorial_form" method="post" action="index.php">
<table width="400" border="0">
<tr>
<td align="right">Name</td>
<td><input type="text" name="name"></td>
</tr><tr>
<td align="right">Address</td>
<td><input type="text" name="address"></td>
</tr><tr>
<td align="right">Telephone</td>
<td><input type="text" name="tel"></td>
</tr><tr>
<td align="right">Email</td>
<td><input type="text" name="email"></td>
</tr><tr>
<td><input type="submit" name="listall" value="List All"></td>
<td><input type="submit" name="submit" value="submit"></td>
</tr>
</table>
</form>
<?php
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/footer.php');
?>
```

There are 2 changes here. One is a new button named listall that, when pressed will list all rows in our table. The other is an IF condition to check if the listall button was pressed. 
There is one more thing to do, that is replace the text with language constants so let's take care of that. Open file main.php found in folder /language/english and add this code:```

```php
<?php
define('TT_NAME','Name');
define('TT_EMAIL','Email');
define('TT_ADDRESS','Address');
define('TT_TELEPHONE','Telephone');
?>
```

Here is the final code for index.php:
```php 
<?php
// Tutorial 
// Created by KaotiK 
require('../../mainfile.php');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
if (isset($_POST['listall'])){
echo '<table width="100" border="0">
<tr>
<td bgcolor="#99cc99">'.TT_NAME.'</td>
<td bgcolor="#66cc99">'.TT_ADDRESS.'</td>
<td bgcolor="#99cc99">'.TT_TELEPHONE.'</td>
<td bgcolor="#66cc99">'.TT_EMAIL.'</td>
</tr>';
$query = $xoopsDB->query(' SELECT * FROM ' . $xoopsDB->prefix('tutorial_myform'));
while($myrow = $xoopsDB->fetchArray($query) )
{
$name = $myrow['name'];
$address = $myrow['address'];
$telephone = $myrow['telephone'];
$email = $myrow['email'];
echo '<tr><td bgcolor="#99cc99">'.$name.'</td><td bgcolor="#66cc99">'.$address.'</td><td bgcolor="#99cc99">'.$telephone.'</td><td bgcolor="#66cc99">'.$email.'</td></tr>';
}
echo '</table>';
}
if (isset($_POST['submit'])){
if (empty($_POST['name'])){
echo 'please fill in a name';
} else {
$name=$_POST['name'];
$address=$_POST['address'];
$tel=$_POST['tel'];
$email=$_POST['email'];
$query = "Insert into ".$xoopsDB->prefix("tutorial_myform")." (name, address, telephone, email) values ('$name', '$address', '$tel', '$email' )";
$res=$xoopsDB->query($query);
if(!$res) {
echo "error: $query";
} else {
echo "Data was correctly inserted into DB!";
}
}
}
?>
<form name="tutorial_form" method="post" action="index.php">
<table width="400" border="0">
<tr>
<td align="right"><?php echo TT_NAME; ?></td>
<td><input type="text" name="name"></td>
</tr><tr>
<td align="right"><?php echo TT_ADDRESS; ?></td>
<td><input type="text" name="address"></td>
</tr><tr>
<td align="right"><?php echo TT_TELEPHONE; ?></td>
<td><input type="text" name="tel"></td>
</tr><tr>
<td align="right"><?php echo TT_EMAIL; ?></td>
<td><input type="text" name="email"></td>
</tr><tr>
<td><input type="submit" name="listall" value="List All"></td>
<td><input type="submit" name="submit" value="submit"></td>
</tr>
</table>
</form>
<?php
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/footer.php');
?>
```

That completes this tutorial. I hope you found it usefull.
Here is the completed module. Check this with your own code to see if they match.