# 12.0 Cloning functions, a different approach dealing with classes.

This tutorial was originally written by:Hitesh Agrawal. Since it's no longer available online and such a good tutorial, I copied it to my site.

### Cloning functions, a diferent approach dealing with classes.

In PHP 5 when you assign one object to another object, it creates a reference copy and does not create a duplicate copy. This would create a big mess as all the object will share the same memory defined for the object. To counter this PHP 5 has introduced clone method which creates a duplicate copy of the object. __clone magic method automatically gets called whenever you call clone methods in PHP 5.

**Example – Without Object Cloning**

```php
<?php  
class Animal  
{  
   public $name;  
   public $legs;  
   
   function setName($name)  
   {  
    $this->name = $name;  
   }  
   
   function setLegs($legs)  
   {  
    $this->legs = $legs;  
   }  
}  
   
$tiger = new Animal();  
$tiger->name = "Tiger";  
$tiger->legs = 4;  
   
$kangaroo = $tiger;  
$kangaroo->name = "Kangaroo";  
$kangaroo->legs = 2;  
   
echo $tiger->name."---".$tiger->legs;  
echo "<br>".$kangaroo->name."---".$kangaroo->legs;  
?>  
```

Output:<br>
Kangaroo—2<br>
Kangaroo—2<br>

**Explanation:**
- Here I have created a $tiger object of Animal class
- Created another variable $kangaroo and assigned $tiger to $kangaroo
- After echo it prints the details entered last because both the variables are referring to the same memory location

**Example – Above Example With clone Function**
```php
<?php  
class Animal  
{  
   public $name ;  
   public $legs;  
   
   function setName($name)  
   {  
    $this->name = $name;  
   }  
   
   function setLegs($legs)  
   {  
    $this->legs = $legs;  
   }  
   
   function __clone()  
   {  
    echo "<br>Object Cloning in Progress";  
   }  
}  
   
$tiger = new Animal();  
$tiger->name = "Tiger";  
$tiger->legs = 4;  
   
$kangaroo = clone $tiger;  
$kangaroo->name = "Kangaroo";  
$kangaroo->legs = 2;  
   
echo "<br>".$tiger->name."---".$tiger->legs;  
echo "<br>".$kangaroo->name."---".$kangaroo->legs;  
?>  
```
Output:<br>
Object Cloning in Progress<br>
Tiger—4<br>
Kangaroo—2<br>

**Explanation:**<br>
The above technique of cloning discussed is called shallow copy. There are other techniques called Deep Copy wherein you create duplicate copy of objects referring to other objects etc.
- Here i have created an $tiger object of Animal class
- Then created another variable $kangaroo having clone of $tiger. This calls the __clone magic method
- After echo it prints the details entered by individual object as both of them are referring to separate object and memory location
