# 2.0 Using Smarty templates in a module

In this tutorial I will teach you how to use smarty templates and sanitation in a XOOPS module. So, let's start!

First grab the completed tutorial module from part1. Install it.

By looking at the code in index.php we can se there's a big mixture of php code and html. With big modules it gets very hard and dificult to read what that <td> is for. That's the big advantage of smarty. We can create html templates that are easy to read and modify yet can be generated dynamicly. XOOPS uses smarty with it's own code.
Let's create our first XOOPS  Smarty template. Open xoops_version.php. Now add the code in red:

```
<?php
// Tutorial Module 
// Created by kaotik
$modversion['name'] = "Tutorial";
$modversion['version'] = 2.00;
$modversion['description'] = "This is a tutorial module to teach how to build a simple module";
$modversion['author'] = "KaotiK";
$modversion['credits'] = "KaotiK";
$modversion['help'] = "";
$modversion['license'] = "GPL see LICENSE";
$modversion['official'] = 0;
$modversion['image'] = "images/tutorial.png";
$modversion['dirname'] = "tutorial";
// Admin
$modversion['hasAdmin'] = 0;
// Menu
$modversion['hasMain'] = 1;
$modversion['sqlfile']['mysql'] = "sql/mysql.sql";
$modversion['tables'][0] = "tutorial_myform";
// Templates
$modversion['templates'][1]['file'] = 'tut_main.html';
$modversion['templates'][1]['description'] = '';
?
```

Basically this is telling XOOPS to add a template called tut_main.html to the DB. Now lets create a directory in the tutorial module called templates. Now create an html file inside this directory called tut_main.html. (NOTE: Normally all template files in xoops use .html. Make sure there is NO code inside this file. It should be an empty file.)Now go to module administration and update the tutorial module. You will notice that tut_main.html gets processed by XOOPS. OK, great! Lets go to the next step.
Writing a Smarty template.

Smarty templates are just simple html pages with some special code, in the case of xoops this code is enclosed with <{}>. For example, to grab the xoops url in a smarty template you would use: <{$xoops_url}>

To keep this tutorial simple, I'm going to use an alternative method so that code doesn't get too complicated. Rename file index.php to index_original.php. Now create a new index.php file with the following code:

```
<?php
// Tutorial 
// Created by KaotiK 
require('../../mainfile.php');
$xoopsOption['template_main'] = 'tut_main.html';
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/header.php');
$xoopsTpl->assign('mytest', 'Hello World!');
require(XOOPS_ROOT_PATH.'/footer.php');
?>
```

