# 3.0 Building an AJAX Module


In this tutorial I will teach you how to use ajax in a Xoops module. I will be using xajax. This is my choice there are however many other ajax routines, some are a "php bridge" such as xajax, sajax, etc. Others are pure javascript such as scriptaculous. After tring this tutorial, feel free to experiment with others. Now you may be asking what drove me towards Xajax; well, I also tried a couple and since I mainly like to program in PHP, I felt Xajax provided me with the flexibility I needed.
What is ajax? Ajax allows you to update a piece of your webpage, without having to reload everthing. This can be very usefull and, when correctly applied, really cut down on server loads.

When should I use it? To answer this I'll use an example; suppose you have a table of data. You could use ajax to provide table sorting. Be carefull not to fall into the mistake of thinking that Ajax can solve everything. It's just a tool, that, if used correctly can help user interaction on your site.
Let's get started!

### Step 1- Getting the Tutorial module.

First let's get the tutorial module. Download and install it. This uses the final module from part 2 of my tutorials. I've added a directory named class, inside it I've created another directory named xajax and added the xajax files (version 0.5 beta 4b)in it.I've also renamed index.php to index_from_part2.php and created a new skeleton index file.
 
Tutorial module from part 2 with xajax files added
tutorial
Step 2- Getting xajax to work in xoops.

Here's the new version of index.php: